<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>CHAPTER IX.: of the several subjects of knowledge.</h3>
			<p><b>There</b> are of <b>knowledge</b> two kinds; whereof one is <i>knowledge of fact:</i> the other <i>knowledge of the consequence of one affirmation to another.</i> The former is nothing else, but sense and memory, and is <i>absolute knowledge;</i> as when we see a fact doing, or remember it done: and this is the knowledge required in a witness. The latter is called <i>science;</i> and is <i>conditional;</i> as when we know, that, <i>if the figure shown be a circle, then any straight line through the centre shall divide it into two equal parts.</i> And this is the knowledge required in a philosopher; that is to say, of him that pretends to reasoning.</p>
			<p>The register of <i>knowledge of fact</i> is called <i>history.</i> Whereof there be two sorts: one called <i>natural history;</i> which is the history of such facts, or effects of nature, as have no dependence on man’s <i>will;</i> such as are the histories of <i>metals, plants, animals, regions,</i> and the like. The other, is <i>civil history;</i> which is the history of the voluntary actions of men in commonwealths.</p>
			<p>The registers of science, are such <i>books</i> as contain the <i>demonstrations</i> of consequences of one affirmation, to another; and are commonly called <i>books of philosophy;</i> whereof the sorts are many, according to the diversity of the matter; and may be divided in such manner as I have divided them in the following table.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
